.. _bme680:

bme680 - Driver for BME680 digital environmental sensor
=======================================================

About the sensor
----------------

BME680 is an ultra-low-power environmental sensor that integrates temperature,
pressure, humidity and gas sensors in only one unit.

Communication interfaces
------------------------

The BME680 sensor can be connected using I2C or SPI. Currently, driver only
supports I2C.

The I2C interface supports data rates up to 3.4 Mbps. It is possible to connect
multiple BME680 sensors with different I2C slave addresses to the same I2C bus
or to different I2C buses. Possible I2C slave addresses are 0x76 and 0x77.

Interface selection is done automatically by the sensor using the SPI CS
signal. As long as the CS signal keeps high after power-on reset, the I2C
interface is used. Once the CS signal has been pulled down, SPI interface is
used until next power-on reset.

Measurement process
-------------------

Once the BME680 has been initialized, it can be used for measurements. The
BME680 operates in two different modes, the sleep mode and the forced mode.

The sensor starts after power-up automatically in the sleep mode where it
does not perform any measurement and consumes only 0.15 μA. Measurements are
only done in forced mode.

Please note: There are two further undocumented modes, the parallel and the
sequential mode. They can't be supported by the driver, since it is not clear
what they do and how to use them.

Measurement cylce
-----------------

To perform measurements, the BME680 sensor has to be triggered to switch to
the forced mode. In this mode, it performs exactly one measurement of
temperature, pressure, humidity, and gas in that order, the so-called TPHG
measurement cycle. After the execution of this TPHG measurement cycle, raw
sensor data become available and the sensor returns automatically back to
sleep mode.

Each of the individual measurements can be configured or skipped separately
via the sensor settings, see section Measurement settings. Dependent on the
configuration, the duration of a TPHG measurement cycle can vary from some
milliseconds up to about 4.5 seconds, especially if gas measurement is enabled.

To avoid the blocking of the user task during measurements, the measurement
process is therefore separated into the following steps:

- Trigger the sensor with function :c:func:`bme680_force_measurement()` to
  switch to forced mode in which it performs exactly one THPG measurement
  cycle.
- Wait the measurement duration using function vTaskDelay and the value 
  returned from function :c:func:`bme680_get_measurement_duration()` or wait
  as long as function :c:func:`bme680_is_measuring()` returns true.
- Fetch the results as fixed point values with function 
  :c:func:`bme680_get_results_fixed()` or as floating point values with
  function :c:func:`bme680_get_results_float()`.

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   // as long as sensor configuration isn't changed, the duration can be considered as constant
   uint32_t duration = bme680_get_measurement_duration(sensor);
   ...
   if (bme680_force_measurement(sensor) == ESP_OK) // STEP 1
   {
       // STEP 2: passive waiting until measurement results are available
       vTaskDelay(duration);
   
       // STEP 3: get the results and do something with them
       if (bme680_get_results_float(sensor, &values) == ESP_OK)
           ...
   }
   ...

Alternatively, busy waiting can be realized using function
:c:func:`bme680_is_measuring()`.

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   if (bme680_force_measurement(sensor) == ESP_OK) // STEP 1
   {
       // STEP 2: busy waiting until measurement results are available
       bool busy;
       do
       {
           if (bme680_is_measuring(sensor, &busy) != ESP_OK)
               break;
       }
       while (busy);
   
       // STEP 3: get the results and do something with them
       if (bme680_get_results_float (sensor, &values) == ESP_OK)
           ...
   }
   ...

For convenience, it is also possible to use the high-level functions
:c:func:`bme680_measure_float()` or :c:func:`bme680_measure_fixed()`. These
functions combine all 3 steps above within a single function and are therefore
very easy to use. Please note that these functions must not be used when they
are called from a software timer callback function since the calling task is
delayed using function :c:func:`vTaskDelay()`.

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   // ONE STEP: measure, wait, get the results and do something with them
   if (bme680_measure_float(sensor, &values) == ESP_OK)
       ...
   ...

Measurement results
-------------------

Once the sensor has finished the measurement raw data are available at the
sensor. Either function :c:func:`bme680_get_results_fixed()` or function
:c:func:`bme680_get_results_float()` can be used to fetch the results. Both
functions read raw data from the sensor and converts them into utilizable fixed
point or floating point sensor values.

.. note::

   Conversion of raw sensor data into the final sensor values is based on very
   complex calculations that use a large number of calibration parameters.
   Therefore, the driver does not provide functions that only return the raw
   sensor data.

Dependent on sensor value representation, measurement results contain different
dimensions:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   
   * - Value
     - Fixed Point
     - Floating Point 
     - Conversion
   * - temperature
     - 1/100 °C
     - °C
     - float = fixed / 100
   * - pressure
     - Pascal
     - hPascal
     - float = fixed / 100
   * - humidity
     - 1/1000 %
     - %
     - float = fixed / 1000
   * - gas_resistance
     - Ohm
     - Ohm
     - float = fixed

The gas resistance value in Ohm represents the resistance of sensor's gas
sensitive layer.

If the TPHG measurement cycle or fetching the results fails, invalid sensor
values are returned:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   
   * - Invalid Value
     - Fixed Point
     - Floating Point 
   * - temperature
     - INT16_MIN
     - -327.68
   * - pressure
     - 0
     - 0.0
   * - humidity
     - 0
     - 0.0
   * - gas_resistance
     - 0
     - 0.0

Measurement settings
--------------------

The sensor allows to change a lot of measurement parameters.

Oversampling rates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To increase the resolution of raw sensor data, the sensor supports oversampling
for temperature, pressure, and humidity measurements. Using function
:c:func:`bme680_set_oversampling_rates()`, individual oversampling rates can be
defined for these measurements. With an oversampling rate osr, the resolution of the
according raw sensor data can be increased from 16 bit to 16+ld(osr) bit.

Possible oversampling rates are 1x (default by the driver) 2x, 4x, 8x and 16x.
It is also possible to define an oversampling rate of 0. This deactivates the
corresponding measurement and the output values become invalid.

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   // Changes the oversampling rate for temperature to 4x and for
   //  pressure to 2x. Humidity measurement is skipped.
   bme680_set_oversampling_rates(sensor, BME680_OSR_4X, BME680_OSR_2X, BME680_OSR_NONE);
   ...


IIR Filter
^^^^^^^^^^

The sensor also integrates an internal IIR filter (low pass filter) to reduce
short-term changes in sensor output values caused by external disturbances.
It effectively reduces the bandwidth of the sensor output values.

The filter can optionally be used for pressure and temperature data that are
subject to many short-term changes. With the IIR filter the resolution of
pressure and temperature data increases to 20 bit. Humidity and gas inside the
sensor does not fluctuate rapidly and does not require such a low pass
filtering.

Using function :c:func:`bme680_set_filter_size()`, the user task can change the
size of the filter. The default size is 3. If the size of the filter becomes 0,
the filter is not used.

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   // Change the IIR filter size for temperature and pressure to 7.
   bme680_set_filter_size(sensor, BME680_IIR_SIZE_7);
   ...
   // Don't use IIR filter
   bme680_set_filter_size(sensor, BME680_IIR_SIZE_0);
   ...

Heater profile
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the gas measurement, the sensor integrates a heater. Parameters for this
heater are defined by heater profiles. The sensor supports up to 10 such
heater profiles, which are numbered from 0 to 9. Each profile consists of a
temperature set-point (the target temperature) and a heating duration. By
default, only the heater profile 0 with 320 degree Celsius as target
temperature and 150 ms heating duration is defined.

.. note::
   
   According to the data sheet, target temperatures between 200 and 400
   degrees Celsius are typical and about 20 to 30 ms are necessary for the
   heater to reach the desired target temperature.

Function :c:func:`bme680_set_heater_profile()` can be used to set the
parameters for one of the heater profiles 0..9. Once the parameters of a heater
profile are defined, the gas measurement can be activated with that heater
profile using function :c:func:`bme680_use_heater_profile`. If -1 or
`BME680_HEATER_NOT_USED` is used as heater profile, gas measurement is
deactivated completely.

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   // Change the heater profile 1 to 300 degree Celsius for 100 ms and activate it
   bme680_set_heater_profile(sensor, 1, 300, 100);
   bme680_use_heater_profile(sensor, 1);
   ...
   // Deactivate gas measurement completely
   bme680_use_heater_profile(sensor, BME680_HEATER_NOT_USED);
   ...

If several heater profiles have been defined with function
:c:func:`bme680_set_heater_profile()`, a sequence of gas measurements with
different heater parameters can be realized by a sequence of activations of
different heater profiles for successive TPHG measurements using function
:c:func:`bme680_use_heater_profile()`.

For example, if there were 5 heater profiles defined with following code during
the setup.

.. code-block:: C

   bme680_set_heater_profile(sensor, 0, 200, 100);
   bme680_set_heater_profile(sensor, 1, 250, 120);
   bme680_set_heater_profile(sensor, 2, 300, 140);
   bme680_set_heater_profile(sensor, 3, 350, 160);
   bme680_set_heater_profile(sensor, 4, 400, 180);

the user task could use them as a sequence like following:

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   while (1)
   {
       switch (count++ % 5)
       {
           case 0: bme680_use_heater_profile(sensor, 0); break;
           case 1: bme680_use_heater_profile(sensor, 1); break;
           case 2: bme680_use_heater_profile(sensor, 2); break;
           case 3: bme680_use_heater_profile(sensor, 3); break;
           case 4: bme680_use_heater_profile(sensor, 4); break;
       }
   
       // measurement duration changes in each cycle
       uint32_t duration = bme680_get_measurement_duration(sensor);
   
       // trigger the sensor to start one TPHG measurement cycle 
       if (bme680_force_measurement(sensor))
       {
           vTaskDelay(duration);
   
           // get the results and do something with them
           if (bme680_get_results_float(sensor, &values))
               ...
       }
       ...
   }
   ...

Ambient temperature
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The heater resistance calculation algorithm takes into account the ambient
temperature of the sensor. Using function 
:c:func:`bme680_set_ambient_temperature()`, the ambient temperature either
determined from the sensor itself or from another temperature sensor can be
set.

.. code-block:: C

   ...
   bme680_set_ambient_temperature(sensor, ambient);
   ...

.. doxygengroup:: bme680
   :members:

